<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h2>
			<section id="chapter-6-nikhil" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
			<h3 epub:type="title">Nikhil's Story</h3>
			<section id="chapter-6-nihil-8" epub:type="z3998:division">
			<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h4>
			<p id="id00694" style="margin-top: 3em">A FEW days later, my master brought Panchu round to me. His __zamindar__, it appeared, had fined him a hundred rupees, and was threatening him with ejectment.</p>
			<p id="id00695">“For what fault?” I enquired.</p>
			<p id="id00696">“Because,” I was told, “he has been found selling foreign cloths. He begged and prayed Harish Kundu, his __zamindar__, to let him sell off his stock, bought with borrowed money, promising faithfully never to do it again; but the __zamindar__ would not hear of it, and insisted on his burning the foreign stuff there and then, if he wanted to be let off. Panchu in his desperation blurted out defiantly: “I can’t afford it! You are rich; why not buy it up and burn it?” This only made Harish Kundu red in the face as he shouted: “The scoundrel must be taught manners, give him a shoe-beating!” So poor Panchu got insulted as well as fined.</p>
			<p id="id00697">“What happened to the cloth?”</p>
			<p id="id00698">“The whole bale was burnt.”</p>
			<p id="id00699">“Who else was there?”</p>
			<p id="id00700">“Any number of people, who all kept shouting __Bande Mataram__. Sandip was also there. He took up some of the ashes, crying: ‘Brothers! This is the first funeral pyre lighted by your village in celebration of the last rites of foreign commerce. These are sacred ashes. Smear yourselves with them in token of your __Swadeshi__ vow.’ ”</p>
			<p id="id00701">“Panchu,” said I, turning to him, “you must lodge a complaint.”</p>
			<p id="id00702">“No one will bear me witness,” he replied.</p>
			<p id="id00703">“None bear witness?⁠—Sandip! Sandip!”</p>
			<p id="id00704">Sandip came out of his room at my call. “What is the matter?” he asked.</p>
			<p id="id00705">“Won’t you bear witness to the burning of this man’s cloth?”</p>
			<p id="id00706">Sandip smiled. “Of course I shall be a witness in the case,” he said. “But I shall be on the opposite side.”</p>
			<p id="id00707">“What do you mean,” I exclaimed, “by being a witness on this or that side? Will you not bear witness to the truth?”</p>
			<p id="id00708">“Is the thing which happens the only truth?”</p>
			<p id="id00709">“What other truths can there be?”</p>
			<p id="id00710">“The things that ought to happen! The truth we must build up will require a great deal of untruth in the process. Those who have made their way in the world have created truth, not blindly followed it.”</p>
			<p id="id00711">“And so⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id00712">“And so I will bear what you people are pleased to call false witness, as they have done who have created empires, built up social systems, founded religious organizations. Those who would rule do not dread untruths; the shackles of truth are reserved for those who will fall under their sway. Have you not read history? Do you not know that in the immense cauldrons, where vast political developments are simmering, untruths are the main ingredients?”</p>
			<p id="id00713">“Political cookery on a large scale is doubtless going on, but⁠—”</p>
			<p id="id00714">“Oh, I know! You, of course, will never do any of the cooking. You prefer to be one of those down whose throats the hotchpotch which is being cooked will be crammed. They will partition Bengal and say it is for your benefit. They will seal the doors of education and call it raising the standard. But you will always remain good boys, snivelling in your corners. We bad men, however, must see whether we cannot erect a defensive fortification of untruth.”</p>
			<p id="id00715">“It is no use arguing about these things, Nikhil,” my master interposed. “How can they who do not feel the truth within them, realize that to bring it out from its obscurity into the light is man’s highest aim⁠—not to keep on heaping material outside?”</p>
			<p id="id00716">Sandip laughed. “Right, sir!” said he. “Quite a correct speech for a schoolmaster. That is the kind of stuff I have read in books; but in the real world I have seen that man’s chief business is the accumulation of outside material. Those who are masters in the art, advertise the biggest lies in their business, enter false accounts in their political ledgers with their broadest-pointed pens, launch their newspapers daily laden with untruths, and send preachers abroad to disseminate falsehood like flies carrying pestilential germs. I am a humble follower of these great ones. When I was attached to the Congress party I never hesitated to dilute ten per cent of truth with ninety per cent of untruth. And now, merely because I have ceased to belong to that party, I have not forgotten the basic fact that man’s goal is not truth but success.”</p>
			<p id="id00717">“True success,” corrected my master.</p>
			<p id="id00718">“Maybe,” replied Sandip, “but the fruit of true success ripens only by cultivating the field of untruth, after tearing up the soil and pounding it into dust. Truth grows up by itself like weeds and thorns, and only worms can expect to get fruit from it!” With this he flung out of the room.</p>
			<p id="id00719">My master smiled as he looked towards me. “Do you know, Nikhil,” he said, “I believe Sandip is not irreligious⁠—his religion is of the obverse side of truth, like the dark moon, which is still a moon, for all that its light has gone over to the wrong side.”</p>
			<p id="id00720">“That is why,” I assented, “I have always had an affection for him, though we have never been able to agree. I cannot contemn him, even now; though he has hurt me sorely, and may yet hurt me more.”</p>
			<p id="id00721">“I have begun to realize that,” said my master. “I have long wondered how you could go on putting up with him. I have, at times, even suspected you of weakness. I now see that though you two do not rhyme, your rhythm is the same.”</p>
			<p id="id00722">“Fate seems bent on writing __Paradise Lost__ in blank verse, in my case, and so has no use for a rhyming friend!” I remarked, pursuing his conceit.</p>
			<p id="id00723">“But what of Panchu?” resumed my master.</p>
			<p id="id00724">“You say Harish Kundu wants to eject him from his ancestral holding. Supposing I buy it up and then keep him on as my tenant?”</p>
			<p id="id00725">“And his fine?”</p>
			<p id="id00726">“How can the __zamindar__ realize that if he becomes my tenant?”</p>
			<p id="id00727">“His burnt bale of cloth?”</p>
			<p id="id00728">“I will procure him another. I should like to see anyone interfering with a tenant of mine, for trading as he pleases!”</p>
			<p id="id00729">“I am afraid, sir,” interposed Panchu despondently, “while you big folk are doing the fighting, the police and the law vultures will merrily gather round, and the crowd will enjoy the fun, but when it comes to getting killed, it will be the turn of only poor me!”</p>
			<p id="id00730">“Why, what harm can come to you?”</p>
			<p id="id00731">“They will burn down my house, sir, children and all!”</p>
			<p id="id00732">“Very well, I will take charge of your children,” said my master.<br/>
			“You may go on with any trade you like. They shan’t touch you.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00733">That very day I bought up Panchu’s holding and entered into formal possession. Then the trouble began.</p>
			<p id="id00734">Panchu had inherited the holding of his grandfather as his sole surviving heir. Everybody knew this. But at this juncture an aunt turned up from somewhere, with her boxes and bundles, her rosary, and a widowed niece. She ensconced herself in Panchu’s home and laid claim to a life interest in all he had.</p>
			<p id="id00735">Panchu was dumbfounded. “My aunt died long ago,” he protested.</p>
			<p id="id00736">In reply he was told that he was thinking of his uncle’s first wife, but that the former had lost no time in taking to himself a second.</p>
			<p id="id00737">“But my uncle died before my aunt,” exclaimed Panchu, still more mystified. “Where was the time for him to marry again?”</p>
			<p id="id00738">This was not denied. But Panchu was reminded that it had never been asserted that the second wife had come after the death of the first, but the former had been married by his uncle during the latter’s lifetime. Not relishing the idea of living with a co-wife she had remained in her father’s house till her husband’s death, after which she had got religion and retired to holy Brindaban, whence she was now coming. These facts were well known to the officers of Harish Kundu, as well as to some of his tenants. And if the __zamindar’s__ summons should be peremptory enough, even some of those who had partaken of the marriage feast would be forthcoming!</p>
		</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-nihil-9" epub:type="z3998:division">
			<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h4>
			<p id="id00740" style="margin-top: 3em">One afternoon, when I happened to be specially busy, word came to my office room that Bimala had sent for me. I was startled.</p>
			<p id="id00741">“Who did you say had sent for me?” I asked the messenger.</p>
			<p id="id00742">“The Rani Mother.”</p>
			<p id="id00743">“The Bara Rani?”</p>
			<p id="id00744">“No, sir, the Chota Rani Mother.”</p>
			<p id="id00745">The Chota Rani! It seemed a century since I had been sent for by her. I kept them all waiting there, and went off into the inner apartments. When I stepped into our room I had another shock of surprise to find Bimala there with a distinct suggestion of being dressed up. The room, which from persistent neglect had latterly acquired an air of having grown absent-minded, had regained something of its old order this afternoon. I stood there silently, looking enquiringly at Bimala.</p>
			<p id="id00746">She flushed a little and the fingers of her right hand toyed for a time with the bangles on her left arm. Then she abruptly broke the silence. “Look here! Is it right that ours should be the only market in all Bengal which allows foreign goods?”</p>
			<p id="id00747">“What, then, would be the right thing to do?” I asked.</p>
			<p id="id00748">“Order them to be cleared out!”</p>
			<p id="id00749">“But the goods are not mine.”</p>
			<p id="id00750">“Is not the market yours?”</p>
			<p id="id00751">“It is much more theirs who use it for trade.”</p>
			<p id="id00752">“Let them trade in Indian goods, then.”</p>
			<p id="id00753">“Nothing would please me better. But suppose they do not?”</p>
			<p id="id00754">“Nonsense! How dare they be so insolent? Are you not⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p id="id00755">“I am very busy this afternoon and cannot stop to argue it out.<br/>
			But I must refuse to tyrannize.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00756">“It would not be tyranny for selfish gain, but for the sake of the country.”</p>
			<p id="id00757">“To tyrannize for the country is to tyrannize over the country. But that I am afraid you will never understand.” With this I came away.</p>
			<p id="id00758">All of a sudden the world shone out for me with a fresh clearness. I seemed to feel it in my blood, that the Earth had lost the weight of its earthiness, and its daily task of sustaining life no longer appeared a burden, as with a wonderful access of power it whirled through space telling its beads of days and nights. What endless work, and withal what illimitable energy of freedom! None shall check it, oh, none can ever check it! From the depths of my being an uprush of joy, like a waterspout, sprang high to storm the skies.</p>
			<p id="id00759">I repeatedly asked myself the meaning of this outburst of feeling. At first there was no intelligible answer. Then it became clear that the bond against which I had been fretting inwardly, night and day, had broken. To my surprise I discovered that my mind was freed from all mistiness. I could see everything relating to Bimala as if vividly pictured on a camera screen. It was palpable that she had specially dressed herself up to coax that order out of me. Till that moment, I had never viewed Bimala’s adornment as a thing apart from herself. But today the elaborate manner in which she had done up her hair, in the English fashion, made it appear a mere decoration. That which before had the mystery of her personality about it, and was priceless to me, was now out to sell itself cheap.</p>
			<p id="id00760">As I came away from that broken cage of a bedroom, out into the golden sunlight of the open, there was the avenue of bauhinias, along the gravelled path in front of my verandah, suffusing the sky with a rosy flush. A group of starlings beneath the trees were noisily chattering away. In the distance an empty bullock cart, with its nose on the ground, held up its tail aloft⁠—one of its unharnessed bullocks grazing, the other resting on the grass, its eyes dropping for very comfort, while a crow on its back was pecking away at the insects on its body.</p>
			<p id="id00761">I seemed to have come closer to the heartbeats of the great earth in all the simplicity of its daily life; its warm breath fell on me with the perfume of the bauhinia blossoms; and an anthem, inexpressibly sweet, seemed to peal forth from this world, where I, in my freedom, live in the freedom of all else.</p>
			<p id="id00762">We, men, are knights whose quest is that freedom to which our ideals call us. She who makes for us the banner under which we fare forth is the true Woman for us. We must tear away the disguise of her who weaves our net of enchantment at home, and know her for what she is. We must beware of clothing her in the witchery of our own longings and imaginings, and thus allow her to distract us from our true quest.</p>
			<p id="id00763">Today I feel that I shall win through. I have come to the gateway of the simple; I am now content to see things as they are. I have gained freedom myself; I shall allow freedom to others. In my work will be my salvation.</p>
			<p id="id00764">I know that, time and again, my heart will ache, but now that I understand its pain in all its truth, I can disregard it. Now that I know it concerns only me, what after all can be its value? The suffering which belongs to all mankind shall be my crown.</p>
			<p id="id00765">Save me, Truth! Never again let me hanker after the false paradise of Illusion. If I must walk alone, let me at least tread your path. Let the drum-beats of Truth lead me to Victory.</p>
		</section>
	</section>
			<section id="chapter-6-sandip" epub:type="z3998:subchapter">
			<h3 epub:type="title">Sandip's Story</h3>
			<section id="chapter-6-sandip-7" epub:type="z3998:division">
			<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h4>
			<p id="id00768" style="margin-top: 3em">Bimala sent for me that day, but for a time she could not utter a word; her eyes kept brimming up to the verge of overflowing. I could see at once that she had been unsuccessful with Nikhil. She had been so proudly confident that she would have her own way⁠—but I had never shared her confidence. Woman knows man well enough where he is weak, but she is quite unable to fathom him where he is strong. The fact is that man is as much a mystery to woman as woman is to man. If that were not so, the separation of the sexes would only have been a waste of Nature’s energy.</p>
			<p id="id00769">Ah pride, pride! The trouble was, not that the necessary thing had failed of accomplishment, but that the entreaty, which had cost her such a struggle to make, should have been refused. What a wealth of colour and movement, suggestion and deception, group themselves round this “me” and “mine” in woman. That is just where her beauty lies⁠—she is ever so much more personal than man. When man was being made, the Creator was a schoolmaster⁠—His bag full of commandments and principles; but when He came to woman, He resigned His headmastership and turned artist, with only His brush and paint-box.</p>
			<p id="id00770">When Bimala stood silently there, flushed and tearful in her broken pride, like a storm-cloud, laden with rain and charged with lightning, lowering over the horizon, she looked so absolutely sweet that I had to go right up to her and take her by the hand. It was trembling, but she did not snatch it away.</p>
			<p id="id00771">“Bee,” said I, “we two are colleagues, for our aims are one.<br/>
			Let us sit down and talk it over.”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00772">I led her, unresisting, to a seat. But strange! at that very point the rush of my impetuosity suffered an unaccountable check⁠—just as the current of the mighty Padma, roaring on in its irresistible course, all of a sudden gets turned away from the bank it is crumbling by some trifling obstacle beneath the surface. When I pressed Bimala’s hand my nerves rang music, like tuned-up strings; but the symphony stopped short at the first movement.</p>
			<p id="id00773">What stood in the way? Nothing singly; it was a tangle of a multitude of things⁠—nothing definitely palpable, but only that unaccountable sense of obstruction. Anyhow, this much has become plain to me, that I cannot swear to what I really am. It is because I am such a mystery to my own mind that my attraction for myself is so strong! If once the whole of myself should become known to me, I would then fling it all away⁠—and reach beatitude!</p>
			<p id="id00774">As she sat down, Bimala went ashy pale. She, too, must have realized what a crisis had come and gone, leaving her unscathed. The comet had passed by, but the brush of its burning tail had overcome her. To help her to recover herself I said: “Obstacles there will be, but let us fight them through, and not be down- hearted. Is not that best, Queen?”</p>
			<p id="id00775">Bimala cleared her throat with a little cough, but simply to murmur: “Yes.”</p>
			<p id="id00776">“Let us sketch out our plan of action,” I continued, as I drew a piece of paper and a pencil from my pocket.</p>
			<p id="id00777">I began to make a list of the workers who had joined us from Calcutta and to assign their duties to each. Bimala interrupted me before I was through, saying wearily: “Leave it now; I will join you again this evening” and then she hurried out of the room. It was evident she was not in a state to attend to anything. She must be alone with herself for a while⁠—perhaps lie down on her bed and have a good cry!</p>
			<p id="id00778">When she left me, my intoxication began to deepen, as the cloud colours grow richer after the sun is down. I felt I had let the moment of moments slip by. What an awful coward I had been! She must have left me in sheer disgust at my qualms⁠—and she was right!</p>
			<p id="id00779">While I was tingling all over with these reflections, a servant came in and announced Amulya, one of our boys. I felt like sending him away for the time, but he stepped in before I could make up my mind. Then we fell to discussing the news of the fights which were raging in different quarters over cloth and sugar and salt; and the air was soon clear of all fumes of intoxication. I felt as if awakened from a dream. I leapt to my feet feeling quite ready for the fray⁠—Bande Mataram!</p>
			<p id="id00780">The news was various. Most of the traders who were tenants of Harish Kundu had come over to us. Many of Nikhil’s officials were also secretly on our side, pulling the wires in our interest. The Marwari shopkeepers were offering to pay a penalty, if only allowed to clear their present stocks. Only some Mahomedan traders were still obdurate.</p>
			<p id="id00781">One of them was taking home some German-made shawls for his family. These were confiscated and burnt by one of our village boys. This had given rise to trouble. We offered to buy him Indian woollen stuffs in their place. But where were cheap Indian woollens to be had? We could not very well indulge him in Cashmere shawls! He came and complained to Nikhil, who advised him to go to law. Of course Nikhil’s men saw to it that the trial should come to nothing, even his law-agent being on our side!</p>
			<p id="id00782">The point is, if we have to replace burnt foreign clothes with Indian cloth every time, and on the top of that fight through a law-suit, where is the money to come from? And the beauty of it is that this destruction of foreign goods is increasing their demand and sending up the foreigner’s profits⁠—very like what happened to the fortunate shopkeeper whose chandeliers the nabob delighted in smashing, tickled by the tinkle of the breaking glass.</p>
			<p id="id00783">The next problem is⁠—since there is no such thing as cheap and gaudy Indian woollen stuff, should we be rigorous in our boycott of foreign flannels and memos, or make an exception in their favour?</p>
			<p id="id00784">“Look here!” said I at length on the first point, “we are not going to keep on making presents of Indian stuff to those who have got their foreign purchases confiscated. The penalty is intended to fall on them, not on us. If they go to law, we must retaliate by burning down their granaries!⁠—What startles you, Amulya? It is not the prospect of a grand illumination that delights me! You must remember, this is War. If you are afraid of causing suffering, go in for love-making, you will never do for this work!”</p>
			<p id="id00785">The second problem I solved by deciding to allow no compromise with foreign articles, in any circumstance whatever. In the good old days, when these gaily coloured foreign shawls were unknown, our peasantry used to manage well enough with plain cotton quilts⁠—they must learn to do so again. They may not look as gorgeous, but this is not the time to think of looks.</p>
			<p id="id00786">Most of the boatmen had been won over to refuse to carry foreign goods, but the chief of them, Mirjan, was still insubordinate.</p>
			<p id="id00787">“Could you not get his boat sunk?” I asked our manager here.</p>
			<p id="id00788">“Nothing easier, sir,” he replied. “But what if afterwards I am held responsible?”</p>
			<p id="id00789">“Why be so clumsy as to leave any loophole for responsibility? However, if there must be any, my shoulders will be there to bear it.”</p>
			<p id="id00790">Mirjan’s boat was tied near the landing-place after its freight had been taken over to the market-place. There was no one on it, for the manager had arranged for some entertainment to which all had been invited. After dusk the boat, loaded with rubbish, was holed and set adrift. It sank in mid-stream.</p>
			<p id="id00791">Mirjan understood the whole thing. He came to me in tears to beg for mercy. “I was wrong, sir⁠—” he began.</p>
			<p id="id00792">“What makes you realize that all of a sudden?” I sneered.</p>
			<p id="id00793">He made no direct reply. “The boat was worth two thousand rupees,” he said. “I now see my mistake, and if excused this time I will never⁠ ⁠…” with which he threw himself at my feet.</p>
			<p id="id00794">I asked him to come ten days later. If only we could pay him that two thousand rupees at once, we could buy him up body and soul. This is just the sort of man who could render us immense service, if won over. We shall never be able to make any headway unless we can lay our hands on plenty of money.</p>
			<p id="id00795">As soon as Bimala came into the sitting-room, in the evening, I said as I rose up to receive her: “Queen! Everything is ready, success is at hand, but we must have money.</p>
			<p id="id00796">“Money? How much money?”</p>
			<p id="id00797">“Not so very much, but by hook or by crook we must have it!”</p>
			<p id="id00798">“But how much?”</p>
			<p id="id00799">“A mere fifty thousand rupees will do for the present.”</p>
			<p id="id00800">Bimala blenched inwardly at the figure, but tried not to show it.<br/>
			How could she again admit defeat?<br/></p>
			<p id="id00801">“Queen!” said I, “you only can make the impossible possible. Indeed you have already done so. Oh, that I could show you the extent of your achievement⁠—then you would know it. But the time for that is not now. Now we want money!”</p>
			<p id="id00802">“You shall have it,” she said.</p>
			<p id="id00803">I could see that the thought of selling her jewels had occurred to her. So I said: “Your jewels must remain in reserve. One can never tell when they may be wanted.” And then, as Bimala stared blankly at me in silence, I went on: “This money must come from your husband’s treasury.”</p>
			<p id="id00804">Bimala was still more taken aback. After a long pause she said:<br/>
			“But how am Ito get his money?”<br/></p>
			<p id="id00805">“Is not his money yours as well?”</p>
			<p id="id00806">“Ah, no!” she said, her wounded pride hurt afresh.</p>
			<p id="id00807">“If not,” I cried, “neither is it his, but his country’s, whom he has deprived of it, in her time of need!”</p>
			<p id="id00808">“But how am Ito get it?” she repeated.</p>
			<p id="id00809">“Get it you shall and must. You know best how. You must get it for Her to whom it rightfully belongs. __Bande Mataram__! These are the magic words which will open the door of his iron safe, break through the walls of his strong-room, and confound the hearts of those who are disloyal to its call. Say __Bande Mataram__, Bee!”</p>
			<p id="id00810">”__Bande Mataram__!”</p>
		</section>
	</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
